# ST-Capstone
  We are influenced by our surroundings at the cellular level. Through sending and receiving ligands and other molecular cues, cells communicate with one another and their environment, and these interactions ultimately shape their phenotype. We can relate transcriptome-wide gene expression to the position of the corresponding cell in its native environment by analyzing spatial RNA-seq data. In contrast to data analysis, modeling and simulation-based approaches help us think about potential mechanisms underlying biological processes. With a mathematical model, we can test perturbations for later experimental validation. In the field of spatial RNA-seq simulators, existing methods (SRTSim, scCube, scDesign3, Spider, Synthspot) focus on capturing features of the spatial RNA-seq reference data, and are limited in creating novel expression patterns with a biological basis in cell-cell signaling. Therefore, we developed a spatial RNA-seq simulator that models cell-cell communication to generate spatial gene expression patterns capturing these biological interactions, critical to the mechanisms behind disease and development. In order to address this, the solutions chosen were (1) to code in R, (2) to create a hybrid agent-based reaction-diffusion model, (3) to simulate gene expression with SymSim, and (4) to use endometrial data for comparison and verification. We have developed a combined agent-based and reaction-diffusion model in R to generate cell state changes. This combined hybrid model was combined with the gene expression simulator, SymSim, to get gene expression data for the simulation. An interactive R Shiny application has also been created to implement the full algorithm within a user-friendly interface. We then tested and verified our simulator by looking at an existing cell-network model, the toggle switch, and applying it on endometrial data to provide a more biological example. Both tests verified that our simulator worked to accurately recreate spatial RNA-seq data. For future work, we hope to benchmark and expand the capabilities of our simulator.
